PURPOSE
This procedure describes the process for designing, revising and distributing Product Monograph for a medicinal product and intended to be circulated among medical professionals.
SCOPE
This SOP is applicable to all the designated personnel responsible for designing of the Product Monograph and for ensuring the timely update of relevant scientific data.
RESPONSIBILITY
The Author of the Product Monograph is responsible for preparing the initial draft of the Product Monograph and discuss it with the Medical director for review, comments and final approval before dispatching it to the Product Management Team.
The author is responsible for timely revision and updating of the Product Monograph.
POLICY
The first copy of all SOPs will be maintained in a soft copy form with the original signatures in the custody of the Quality Assurance Department. Second copy will be made available in the controlled form for reference by employees. The forms, templates and checklists will have restricted access to employees.
GENERAL PRINCIPLES
What Is a Product Monograph?
A monograph is a detailed specialist work of writing on a single subject (new drug) or an aspect of a subject, usually by a single author.
Drug product monograph is an accurate, genuine, scientific document on the drug product that, devoid of promotional material, describes the properties, claims, indications, and conditions of use for the drug. It also contains any other information that may be required for optimal, safe, and effective use of the drug.
A product monograph should include appropriate information on the name of the drug, its therapeutic or pharmacologic classification, its actions and/or clinical pharmacology, and its indications and clinical uses.
The Product Monograph consists of two sections:
Part 1 - Scientific Information
Part 2 – Drug Information for Health Professionals, i.e. prescribing information
General instructions
A product monograph should be prepared with the following guiding principles as a basis for the information:
Avoid duplication of information. Wherever possible, information should only be presented once in the monograph.
Key information should be easy to locate.
Information in the monographs should be presented in a consistent format to facilitate ease of retrieval, particularly in an electronic environment.
Inserts of important conclusions on every aspect.
Should contain figures and tables duly numbered and detailed in the text
Authentic references should be cited in the text.
Revisions
Revisions should be initiated by the sponsor/company whenever significant updating of the product monograph is required in order to incorporate additions or other changes related to safety (particularly with respect to warnings, precautions, adverse reactions, and mode of administration) that may be necessary as a result of newly available information.
The product monograph should also be revised whenever substantial information is available to support significant new indications or when other changes or deletions in the indications and conditions of use are required as a result of additional available information.
Distribution
A copy of the product monograph should be provided to health professionals prior to, or coincident with, the first direct promotion or marketing of a new drug, and to any health professionals to whom the sponsor sells a new drug before it is generally available.
A copy of the current product monograph should be provided to health professionals whenever they request prescribing information or other information relevant to the clinical use of the new drug.
PROCEDURES
Title Page
The title page should have the following information:
Name of document- “Product Monograph”
The brand name of the drug product (highlighted)
The proper or common name of the drug product(s) in final dosage form
Strength(s) and Route(s) of Administration
Where there is no proper or common name for the drug product in final dosage form, list all medicinal ingredients by their proper or common name, along with the dosage form of the final drug product,
The therapeutic, diagnostic or pharmacological classification
Sponsor Name (company), Company Address
Date: For a new product monograph use the date of preparation. For subsequent revisions to any part of the product monograph, also include the most current revision date; and,
Date of Initial Approval: DD, MM, YYYY
Date of Revision: DD, MM, YYYY
Table of Contents
The product monograph should include a table of contents with page numbers.
Summary Product Monograph
It is a brief but comprehensive synopsis, which highlights key points in such a way that readers can rapidly become acquainted with the monograph without having to read the full document.
Introduction/background
This segment consists of statements on what led the company to launch the drug or product.  A historical background may be given.  It should describe as clearly as possible the root cause of the problem intended to be addressed and refer to the relevant literature in the field. It is an overview of factors which have led to the problem, comprise the problem and historical/epidemiological significance relative to the problem.
Rationale for product launch
This section will describe the existing therapy gaps in the management of particular disease.  This section also throws a light on how this “new drug” will address the gaps in existing management.
It will also discuss the unique features or advantages over existing standard treatment.
How this new therapy will improve the quality of life of patient.
Scientific Information
Pharmaceutical Information
This sub-section should include information on the drug substance under the following headings:
Proper name or common name;
Chemical name;
Molecular formula and molecular mass;
Structural formula, including relative and absolute stereochemistry;
Relevant physicochemical properties, for e.g., physical description, solubility over the physiological pH range, polymorphic form
Clinical Pharmacology
This section should include a concise synopsis of the salient features of the drug's mechanism/s of action, pharmacodynamics and pharmacokinetics. The information should have a demonstrated relevance to the pharmacology or pharmacodynamics of the drug in humans.
Mechanism of Action
A brief description of the mechanism by which the drug achieves its pharmacological effect should be outlined here.
Pharmacodynamics
This section should include a brief description of factors that may affect pharmacodynamic response (clinical effectiveness, safety, and dose-response).
Microbiology
This section is needed for all antimicrobial drugs. It should comprise of laboratory studies and be divided, where appropriate, into in vitro and in vivo sub-sections. Details regarding susceptibility testing, reference pathogens studied should be included. Information on drug resistance and cross-resistance should be included.
Pharmacokinetics
A summary table of the most clinically significant pharmacokinetic features should be presented in a table. This section should also include a short explanation of the clinical significance of the basic pharmacokinetic data for the general population, under the following headings:
Absorption
Information regarding the drug's properties, such as area under the curve (AUC), Tmax, Cmax, time of onset of action, effect of food on absorption and time to steady state.
Distribution
Degree of protein binding, volume of distribution (Vd), sites of distribution, including whether the drug crosses the blood-brain barrier and placental barrier.
Metabolism
Sites and pathway of metabolism (e.g. CYP450), extent of first-pass metabolism, biological/pharmacological activity of metabolites, and dose dependent changes in metabolism
Excretion
Route(s) of excretion and the percentage via each route, elimination half-life (t½), and clearance
Special Populations/Conditions
This section should include pharmacokinetic information that is relevant to special populations (e.g., pediatrics, geriatrics, gender, genetic polymorphism, and race) and certain conditions (e.g., hepatic insufficiency, renal insufficiency).
Indications and Clinical Use
This section should contain a point-form listing of the indications, followed by a brief discussion of any relevant clinical information.
The indications to be described in this section should be approved by DCGI or USFDA or EU.
Geriatrics
For indications approved for adults in general, a statement regarding use in the geriatric population should be included.
Pediatrics
For indications approved for adults in general, a statement regarding use in the pediatric population should be included.
Where applicable, a statement should be included to indicate that the product is intended for use as an adjunct to other forms of treatment of the condition.
For products requiring administration by a specialized health professional or in a restricted setting, an explanation of the restrictions should be provided.
The clinical usage to be described in this section should be based on substantial evidence of the product's efficacy and safety, derived from adequately designed and well-controlled clinical studies.
Contraindications
This section should describe situations in which the drug should not be used because the risk outweighs any potential therapeutic benefit.
For hypersensitivity reactions, the statement used should be: Patients who are hypersensitive to this drug or to any ingredient/excipients in the formulation.
Dosage and Administration
Dosing Considerations
This section should briefly list the safety issues to consider when administering a dosage regimen in an individual patient (e.g., renal/hepatic disease, age, concomitant therapy, genetic polymorphism, and titration).
Where different dosage forms are available, if the dosages are not equivalent the conversion value should be stated.
Recommended Dose and Dosage Adjustment
This section should provide detailed and practical information on the recommended dosage.
The section should include: dosage schedules, the initial dose, the optimal method of titrating dosage, the dosage range, maximum daily dose, maintenance dosage, duration of treatment and drug discontinuation schedule.
When applicable, dosages should be provided for each indication, route of administration and dosage form.
Guidance should be given on the dosage adjustments necessary when administering the drug in special populations (e.g., children, elderly) or in the presence of co-morbidities (e.g., renal disease, hepatic disease, genetic polymorphism).
When an age descriptor is used (e.g., children), the age range should be specified.
If no dosage adjustments are required a statement to that effect should be included (e.g., No dosage adjustment required in hepatic or renal impairment).
The time of day for optimal drug effect should be indicated (e.g., evening, morning etc.) where applicable.
Timing of administration of a dose with respect to food should be indicated.
Drug Interactions
Interactions of any of the drugs present in the formulations with other drugs during concomitant administration should be mentioned.
Serious Warnings and Precautions
Clinically significant or life-threatening safety hazards when taking the drug should be highlighted in the “Serious Warnings and Precautions”.
A brief statement is provided in the Serious Warnings and Precautions with a cross-reference to the applicable section of the product monograph where complete details are provided.
Adverse Reactions
This section should contain information on all types of adverse drug reactions (ADRs) including those identified during clinical trials and as a result of post-market surveillance. Information relating to clinical trial ADRs and post-market ADRs should be presented separately.
The standard for defining frequency terms will be based on the Council for International Organizations of Medical Science (CIOMS) convention. Specifically:
Very common: ≥1/10 (≥10%);
Common (frequent): ≥1/100 and <1/10 (≥1% and <10%);
Uncommon (infrequent): ≥1/1,000 and <1/100 (≥0.1% and <1%);
Rare: ≥1/10,000 and <1/1,000 (≥0.01% and <0.1%);
Very rare: <1/10,000 (<0.01%), including isolated reports.
Landmark Clinical Trials
The clinical trials section of the product monograph should contain the pivotal studies in support of the drug's efficacy and safety.
The detailed information should address the following major components: the demographics of the studies, including number of study subjects (intention to treat population), age (mean and range), gender and race composition; the trial design, including dose, route of administration and duration of treatment; the results of the studies, including primary endpoints and associated values for the drug and placebo or active control and statistical significance.
The information on clinical trials should be presented in a tabular format for ease of retrieval of the information.
This section should also include comparative bioavailability studies, as required, for revised formulation and new dosage forms.
Efficacy and Safety Studies
Studies that should be included are adequate, well-controlled studies that support the efficacy, safety and dosing regimens for the drug and studies that provide information about the limitations of effectiveness.
The doses or dose ranges used in the study as well as therapy duration should be provided for all treatment involved in the study.
The primary and secondary measurements and endpoints to determine efficacy and/or safety should be clearly specified. The treatment groups should be compared for all critical measures of efficacy/safety provided.
Results of clinical and statistical significance should be included; results that only demonstrate statistical significance without clinical significance generally should not be included, unless deemed appropriate in certain circumstances.
More than one table may be required to capture results e.g., different indications, different age groups, etc.
Pivotal Comparative Bioavailability Studies
For all revised formulations and new dosage forms whose safety and efficacy is supported solely on the basis of comparative bioavailability studies, a summary of the study should be provided in table format.
Summary & Key Points
The key points regarding the medicinal product should be listed and should contain the following:
Statement on any unique pharmacological/clinical aspect of the medicinal product
Statement on superior/non-inferior efficacy over existing treatment
Statement on superior/non-inferior safety profile over existing
Statement on authentic clinical evidence on proof of concept
Statement on place in therapy of the concerned disease/disorder
References
The citations should follow the Vancouver referencing style.
These references should be numbered to refer to identified statements in the text of the product monograph.
This section should include a selection of the pivotal clinical studies that formed the basis for the evaluation of the drug and the studies highlighted in the Clinical Trial section.
This section may also include references to the best published papers containing preclinical data on the drug and selected, authoritative papers concerning the use of the drug.
Studies in support of the clinical trial section should be included (published or unpublished).
Prescribing Information
The information as given in pack insert should be included at the end of monograph. Pack insert information should be approved by drug regulatory authority e.g. DCGI.
It is the legal pharmacologic description of a drug, subject to detailed regulatory specifications, including approved chemical and proprietary names, description and classification, clinical pharmacology, approved indications and usage, contraindications, warnings, precautions, adverse reactions, drug abuse and dependence information, overdosage discussion, dosage and administration, formulations, and appropriate references.
REVIEW SUMMARY

[TABLE 1]
 |  | SOP. No.: COMPANY_MM_01 / Version No.: 1
Confidential | Effective Date: | Supersedes: None
Confidential | Review Date: | Review Date:
SOP Title: Preparation of Product Monograph | SOP Title: Preparation of Product Monograph | SOP Title: Preparation of Product Monograph

[TABLE 2]
 | Prepared By | Reviewed  By | Approved By
Name |  |  | 
Designation |  |  | 
Sign & date |  |  | 

[TABLE 3]
Sr. / No. | Pg. No. | Section/Clause/Para/ line | Date of Amendment | Amendment made | Reasons of Amendment
 |  |  |  |  | 
 |  |  |  |  | 
 |  |  |  |  | 
 |  |  |  |  | 