CME slide Preparation- Check List
Instructions:
CME Slides should be prepared with the following guiding principles:
Avoid duplication of information. Wherever possible, information should only be presented once.
Numbering of the slides should be done.
Title slide should be prepared with Brand Name and Generic Name of the concerned medicinal product.
The background of the slides should be relevant to the presentation and should not cause distraction from the contents.
The contents of the slide should not look crowded and cumbersome. Proper spacing should be given between points.
An overview of the presentation should be outlined in the beginning.
Each Slide should have a title with a text size of 36-40.
The contents of the slides should have a text size from 24-28.
Reference should be added in each slide. If available, recent references should be preferred over older references.
Use of suitable animations, clip art, pictures, tables and graphs is highly recommended.
Identifiable photographs of patients should not be used. Remove all patient identifiers from laboratory studies, x-rays, imaging studies, slides, etc. OR obtain written permission from the patient to use his/her information as part of CME presentation.
The presentation must be free of any commercial bias for or against any product.
The presentation should be summarized at the end and key points should be highlighted.
Revisions
Revisions should be initiated by the sponsor/company whenever significant updating of the CME Slides is required in order to incorporate additions or other changes related to safety (particularly with respect to warnings, precautions, adverse reactions, and mode of administration) that may be necessary as a result of newly available information.
The CME Slides should also be revised whenever substantial information is available to support significant new indications or when other changes or deletions in the indications and conditions of use are required as a result of additional available information.