PURPOSE
This procedure describes the process for designing, revising and distributing Package Insert for a medicinal product and intended to be circulated among medical professionals.
SCOPE
This SOP is applicable to all the designated personnel responsible for designing of the Package Insert and for ensuring the timely update of relevant scientific data.
RESPONSIBILITY
The Author of the Package Insert is responsible for preparing the initial draft and discusses it with the Medical director for review, comments and final approval before dispatching it to the Commercial Department.
The author is responsible for timely revision and updating of the Package Insert.
POLICY
The first copy of all SOPs will be maintained in a soft copy form with the original signatures in the custody of the Quality Assurance Department. Second copy will be made available in the controlled form for reference by employees. The forms, templates and checklists will have restricted access to employees.
GENERAL PRINCIPLES
What Is a Package insert?
A Package Insert is a document provided along with the medicinal product to provide concise information about that particular product.
The purpose of the package insert is to provide essential and unbiased prescribing and safety information to health professionals.
General instructions
A Package insert should be prepared with the following guiding principles as a basis for the information:
Avoid duplication of information.
Key information should be easy to locate.
Should contain key data in tabulated form wherever it is possible.
The information included in the Package Insert must be collated from authentic sources.
Revisions
Revisions should be initiated by the sponsor/company whenever significant updating of the Package Insert is required in order to incorporate additions or other changes related to safety (particularly with respect to warnings, precautions, adverse reactions, and mode of administration) that may be necessary as a result of newly available information.
The Package Insert should also be revised whenever substantial information is available to support significant new indications or when other changes or deletions in the indications and conditions of use are required as a result of additional available information.
C. Distribution
A copy of the package insert should be provided with every medicinal product to act as a source of relevant and concise information for health professionals.
PROCEDURES
INFORMATION ON THE MEDICINAL PRODUCT
Pharmaceutical Information
This sub-section should include information on the drug substance under the following headings:
Proper name or common name;
Chemical name;
Molecular formula and molecular mass;
Structural formula, including relative and absolute stereochemistry;
Relevant physicochemical properties, for e.g., physical description, solubility over the physiological pH range, polymorphic form
Clinical Pharmacology
This section should include a concise synopsis of the salient features of the drug's mechanism/s of action, pharmacodynamics and pharmacokinetics. The information should have a demonstrated relevance to the pharmacology or pharmacodynamics of the drug in humans.
Mechanism of Action
A brief description of the mechanism by which the drug achieves its pharmacological effect should be outlined here.
Pharmacodynamics
This section should include a brief description of factors that may affect pharmacodynamic response (clinical effectiveness, safety, and dose-response).
Microbiology
This section is needed for all antimicrobial drugs. It should comprise of laboratory studies and be divided, where appropriate, into in vitro and in vivo sub-sections. Details regarding susceptibility testing, reference pathogens studied should be included. Information on drug resistance and cross-resistance should be included.
Pharmacokinetics
A summary table of the most clinically significant pharmacokinetic features should be presented in a table. This section should also include a short explanation of the clinical significance of the basic pharmacokinetic data for the general population, under the following headings:
Absorption
Information regarding the drug's properties, such as area under the curve (AUC), Tmax, Cmax, time of onset of action, effect of food on absorption and time to steady state.
Distribution
Degree of protein binding, volume of distribution (Vd), sites of distribution, including whether the drug crosses the blood-brain barrier and placental barrier.
Metabolism
Sites and pathway of metabolism (e.g. CYP450), extent of first-pass metabolism, biological/pharmacological activity of metabolites, and dose dependent changes in metabolism
Excretion
Route(s) of excretion and the percentage via each route, elimination half-life (t½), and clearance
Special Populations/Conditions
This section should include pharmacokinetic information that is relevant to special populations (e.g., pediatrics, geriatrics, gender, genetic polymorphism, and race) and certain conditions (e.g., hepatic insufficiency, renal insufficiency).
Indications and Clinical Use
This section should contain a point-form listing of the indications, followed by a brief discussion of any relevant clinical information.
The indications to be described in this section should be approved by DCGI or USFDA or EU.
Geriatrics
For indications approved for adults in general, a statement regarding use in the geriatric population should be included.
Pediatrics
For indications approved for adults in general, a statement regarding use in the pediatric population should be included.
Where applicable, a statement should be included to indicate that the product is intended for use as an adjunct to other forms of treatment of the condition.
For products requiring administration by a specialized health professional or in a restricted setting, an explanation of the restrictions should be provided.
The clinical usage to be described in this section should be based on substantial evidence of the product's efficacy and safety, derived from adequately designed and well-controlled clinical studies.
Contraindications
This section should describe situations in which the drug should not be used because the risk outweighs any potential therapeutic benefit.
For hypersensitivity reactions, the statement used should be: Patients who are hypersensitive to this drug or to any ingredient/excipients in the formulation.
Dosage and Administration
Dosing Considerations
This section should briefly list the safety issues to consider when administering a dosage regimen in an individual patient (e.g., renal/hepatic disease, age, concomitant therapy, genetic polymorphism, and titration).
Where different dosage forms are available, if the dosages are not equivalent the conversion value should be stated.
Recommended Dose and Dosage Adjustment
This section should provide detailed and practical information on the recommended dosage.
The section should include: dosage schedules, the initial dose, the optimal method of titrating dosage, the dosage range, maximum daily dose, maintenance dosage, duration of treatment and drug discontinuation schedule.
When applicable, dosages should be provided for each indication, route of administration and dosage form.
Guidance should be given on the dosage adjustments necessary when administering the drug in special populations (e.g., children, elderly) or in the presence of co-morbidities (e.g., renal disease, hepatic disease, genetic polymorphism).
When an age descriptor is used (e.g., children), the age range should be specified.
If no dosage adjustments are required a statement to that effect should be included (e.g., No dosage adjustment required in hepatic or renal impairment).
The time of day for optimal drug effect should be indicated (e.g., evening, morning etc.) where applicable.
Timing of administration of a dose with respect to food should be indicated.
Overdosage and treatment:
Toxicity profile of the individual drugs on overdosage should be stated. A brief outline of the management in case of overdosage should be described.
Drug Interactions
Interactions of any of the drugs present in the formulations with other drugs during concomitant administration should be mentioned preferably in a tabulated form.
Adverse Reactions
This section should contain information in a tabulated form on all types of adverse drug reactions (ADRs) including those identified during clinical trials and as a result of post-market surveillance. Information relating to clinical trial ADRs and post-market ADRs should be presented separately.
The standard for defining frequency terms will be based on the Council for International Organizations of Medical Science (CIOMS) convention. Specifically:
Very common: ≥1/10 (≥10%);
Common (frequent): ≥1/100 and <1/10 (≥1% and <10%);
Uncommon (infrequent): ≥1/1,000 and <1/100 (≥0.1% and <1%);
Rare: ≥1/10,000 and <1/1,000 (≥0.01% and <0.1%);
Very rare: <1/10,000 (<0.01%), including isolated reports.
Serious Warnings and Precautions
Clinically significant or life-threatening safety hazards when taking the drug should be highlighted in the “Serious Warnings and Precautions”.
Storage:
The storage temperature and place (if it is to be stored in a dark place) is to be mentioned
Presentation:
The number of tablets/capsules provided in each strip and the contents in  each box are to be given.
REVIEW SUMAMRY

[TABLE 1]
 |  | SOP. No.: COMPANY_MM_05 / Version No.: 1
Confidential | Effective Date: | Supersedes: None
Confidential | Review Date: | Review Date:
SOP Title: Preparation of Package Insert | SOP Title: Preparation of Package Insert | SOP Title: Preparation of Package Insert

[TABLE 2]
 | Prepared By | Reviewed  By | Approved By
Name |  |  | 
Designation |  |  | 
Sign & date |  |  | 

[TABLE 3]
Sr. / No. | Pg. No. | Section/Clause/Para/ line | Date of Amendment | Amendment made | Reasons of Amendment
 |  |  |  |  | 
 |  |  |  |  | 
 |  |  |  |  | 
 |  |  |  |  | 